July 2025



Rulebook released July 2025

Table of Contents
Introduction............................ 3 Navigating the Realm..........12 Activating Abilities.............20

Using this Rulebook..................3 Areas of the Realm................... 12 Tapping a Card........................ 20
Gameplay..................................... 3 Squares ....................................... 12 Playing Sites.............................. 20

How to Win...................................3 The Void...................................... 12 Basic Abilities............................. 21
Decks...............................................3 Sites............................................... 12 Move & Attack.......................... 21

The Four Elements.................. 4 Bodies of Water & Land....... 12 Attacking the Enemy............. 22
Cards............................................ 5 Surface & Subsurface............ 13 Defend.......................................... 24

The Golden Rule...........................5 Regions........................................ 13 Intercept..................................... 25
Card Types.................................. 5 Locating Areas of the  Pick Up or Drop Artifacts.... 25

Avatars.............................................5 Realm............................................. 14 Building Your Own  
Sites...................................................6 Location...................................... 14 Decks..........................................26
Spells.................................................7 Adjacent and Nearby............. 14 Advanced Concepts...............27

Minions...........................................7 Adjacent and Nearby Special Abilities......................... 27
Artifacts.........................................8 Locations.................................... 15 Advanced Movement  
Auras...............................................9 Steps ............................................ 15 Concepts....................................... 28
Magics.............................................9 Turn Summary.........................16 Damage Grids............................. 29 

Game Zones...............................10 1. Start Phase............................ 16 Occupying Multiple Sites....... 29
The Realm.................................... 10 2. Main Phase............................ 16 Ownership and Control.......... 30
Atlas and Spellbook Decks.... 10 3. End Phase.............................. 16 Projectiles.................................... 30
Cemetery...................................... 10 Casting Spells.........................17 Static/Ongoing Effects............ 30
Hand............................................... 10 Mana............................................ 17 The Storyline.............................. 31

Setup...........................................11 Elemental Threshold............. 18 Glossary of Terms and 
Winning the Game.................11 Casting Minions....................... 19 Keywords..................................32

Casting Artifacts...................... 19 Quick Reference Guide........36
Death’s Door &  
Death Blow.................................. 11 Casting Auras............................ 19 Common Keyword  

Casting Magics......................... 19 Abilities......................................... 37

- 2 -



Introduction
In the unfathomable depths of the infinite void, great beings vie for control of fantastical realms, where 
powerful magic imbues every living thing, and even the land itself. Take on the role of a powerful Avatar in 
one of these realms, and tap into the arcane energies of the four elements—Air, Earth, Fire, and Water—
to summon mythical beasts, conjure ancient artifacts, and cast an array of powerful spells beyond all 
imagining. Will you claim dominion over this contested realm?

Using this Rulebook
The goal of this rulebook is to get you up to speed and ready to play your first games of Sorcery: 
Contested Realm. For new players, carry on from here, have someone guide you through a game, or visit 
www.sorcerytcg.com/how-to-play where you’ll find tutorial videos and more. For experienced players, 
this rulebook will handle most of your queries, but you can also explore the Codex (curiosa.io/codex) for 
even more detail.
The game uses terms and keywords that are important to know. When these come up, they have been 
bolded to not only help you identify important words and concepts, but to also tell you that you can find 
more information about that word in the glossary, starting on page 32.

Gameplay
In a game of Sorcery: Contested Realm, you interact with the realm as a powerful Avatar. You will have a 
spellbook, a deck of cards that will allow you to cast spells that summon minions, conjure artifacts, and 
more. You will also have access to your atlas, a deck of cards that allow you to add wondrous sites to the 
play area that both expand your domain and empower you to cast even more devastating spells. 

How to Win
Avatars are summoned to a contested realm with one goal: to vanquish their opponents and claim sole 
dominion. In order to win, you must defeat any opposing Avatar by first reducing their life total to zero, 
placing them at death’s door, and then delivering a final death blow to the weakened Avatar. This severs 
the enemy’s connection to the realm and grants you victory!

Decks
For your first few games, you might want to use preconstructed decks, which will get you straight into the 
action. Or you can craft your own decks, balancing and tuning their powers to fit your play style (see page 
26). The world of Sorcery grants you endless possibilities!

- 3 -



The Four Elements
Sorcery: Contested Realm is built around the four classical elements: Air, Earth, Fire, and Water. Most 
spells in a spellbook are tied to these elements, giving Avatars the power to manipulate the magic of the 
realms. Each element has strengths and weaknesses. Certain abilities can be common in one element 
yet very rare in another. The four elements and their characteristics are:

Air
Air is the element of Knowledge and Power, dabbling in forces beyond mortal control to 
acquire the magical means to respond to any battlefield situation. An attunement with air 
grants you both mobility and tactical options thanks to its ability to teleport units around 
the realm and to increase its available spells.

Earth
Earth is the element of Enduring Strength, defined by its focus on fielding and enhancing 
martial forces throughout the realm. An attunement with earth grants you the ability to 
affect your atlas and minions that can dominate the battle through teamwork and sheer 
fighting power.

Fire
Fire is the element of Desire and Destruction, willing to do whatever it takes to secure victory 
in the realm. An attunement with fire grants you an array of explosive spells and abilities 
that can create bursts of speed or burn friend and foe alike in great gouts of flame.

Water
Water is the element of Charm and Trickery, ready to adapt and disrupt the strategies of the 
enemy as it manipulates all. An attunement with water grants you a powerful homefield 
advantage that will slowly engulf the realm and the ability to position the enemy right 
where you want them.

- 4 -



Cards
In Sorcery: Contested Realm, your cards are what allow you to influence the realm and do battle with 
your opponent. Some cards will bend or even break the rules in this rulebook, in these cases the card’s 
text takes precedence. Before we dig into how cards function in detail, it is important to keep one key 
rule in mind at all times:

The Golden Rule
Some text is intentionally informal or necessarily compact. Use common sense and be cool.

Card Types
There are three main categories of cards: Avatars, sites, and spells. Spells further break down into four 
card types: minion, artifact, aura, and magic. The following pages will describe each type.

Avatars 1
Your Avatar represents you and your connection 
to the realm. Though but a pale echo of your true 
might, everything you do within the realm is 
done through your Avatar. Avatars have some key 2
characteristics: 3

•	 Each Avatar has a name .
•	 Avatars have a starting life , which will 
rise and fall during the game and tells you 
how much the Avatar can endure before being 
placed at death’s door. This is also the Avatar’s 
maximum life, which cannot be exceeded. 
•	 Avatars also have an attack power rating  
that tells you how hard they hit in combat.
•	 Avatars have a game text box  that 
describes their special abilities.

All Avatars are Spellcasters, which means they 4
can cast spells, most often from your hand. 
Finally, Avatars can never enter a region other than 
the surface and ignore many negative effects.

Units
A unit is a collective term that includes both Avatars and minions. Some cards might specify one of 
these types of units, but most affect units in general.

- 5 -



Sites
A site is a locus of power within the 
realm that you may explore and exploit. 
Sites are usually played by activating 
your Avatar’s ability, though they may 
enter the realm in other ways. 
You and your opponent can also attack 
each other’s sites to cause your Avatars 
to lose life, so make sure to defend 
yours. 1 2
Sites have some key characteristics: 

•	 Sites have a name . 4 3
•	 Sites have a typeline  that 
describes key things about that 
card, such as rarity.
•	 Most sites have elemental symbols that increase your elemental affinity , which you will harness 
to use spells and abilities (see page 18).
•	 Sites have a game text box  that describes their special abilities.
•	 Sites will provide you with mana, an important resource that you will need to play cards and use 
abilities during your turn (see page 17).
•	 Sites have two levels: surface and subsurface (see page 13).

Rubble
When a site is destroyed it is placed in its owner’s cemetery as normal, but rather than creating a new 
void, the site is instead replaced with rubble. Rubble is a neutral land site that no player controls, and 
provides no mana or threshold. 
Note: You can use tokens or a face down site to represent rubble on a square.

- 6 -



Spells
Spells represent all of the magical might you are able to bring to bear on this realm. These include 
minions to help you defend your lands and attack the enemy, powerful artifacts that will help you tip the 
balance of power, magics of channeled energy that will overpower foes, and auras of lasting elemental 
magic to impose your will on areas of the realm.

Minions 1
Minions are your greatest allies, assisting you with 
myriad unique abilities in offense and defense. 
Minions have a few key characteristics on their 
card: 2 4

•	 Each minion has a name .
•	 Each minion has a mana cost  that you 3
must pay in order to play it.  
•	 Minions have an elemental threshold 
that your elemental affinity must meet in order 
to be played. 
•	 Minions have a power rating  that reflects 
how hard they hit in combat. It also describes 5
how much damage they can take before dying. 
If the minion receives damage equal to or 
greater than that value, it dies. 6
•	 Minions have a type line  that describes 
key things about that card, such as subtypes 
and rarity.
•	 Minions have a game text box  that 
describes their special abilities.

Token Minions 
Tokens are small-sized cards that work more or less the same as regular 
cards while in the realm. The major difference between cards and tokens 
is that tokens are never part of a player’s deck, and they can never formally 
exist in any zone except within the realm. If a token would be placed 
anywhere else, it is instead removed from the game entirely.
Note: You are free to use anything you want to represent tokens.

- 7 -



Artifacts 1
Artifacts are various relics, edifices, tools, gear, 
gadgets, devices, and baubles, often charged with 
lasting enchantments by wizards of old. Artifacts 
have some key characteristics on their card: 2

•	 Each artifact has a name .
•	 Each artifact has a mana cost  that you 
must pay to play it. 
•	 Artifacts have a type line  that describes 
key things about that card, such as subtypes 
and rarity.
•	 Artifacts have a game text box  that 
describes their special abilities. 3

Note: Unlike other spells, artifacts do not typically 
require an elemental threshold to play.

Artifact Subtypes 4
Artifacts have a variety of subtypes, including 
armor, weapons, relics, devices, documents, 
automatons, or monuments. While most artifacts 
are standard objects that can be carried into battle, 
others such as automatons and monuments  have 
some further characteristics and restrictions.

Automatons Monuments 
Automatons are Monuments are an 
artifacts that are 
minions. As such, 5 artifact subtype that 

cannot be carried.
they have a power 
rating (5), have the 
same basic abilities as 
regular minions, and 
cannot be carried like 
regular artifacts. 

- 8 -



Auras 1
Auras are mostly incorporeal, but lasting, 
manifestations of elemental power. They usually 
impact a large area within the realm, conferring 
boons or conditions within their reach. 2
Auras have some key characteristics on their card:

•	 Each aura has a name . 3
•	 Each aura has a mana cost  that you must 
pay in order to play it.  
•	 Auras also have an elemental threshold 

 that your elemental affinity must meet in 
order to be played. 
•	 Auras have a type line  that describes key 4
things about that card, such as rarity.
•	 Auras have a game text box  that 
describes their special abilities. 5

Magics 1
Magics are transient spells that have immediate 
impact and then dissipate as soon as they resolve. 
Magics have some key characteristics on their 
card: 2

•	 Each magic has a name .
•	 Each magic has a mana cost  that you 3
must pay in order to play it. 
•	 Magics also have an elemental threshold 

 that your elemental affinity must meet in 
order to be played.  
•	 Magics have a type line  that describes key 
things about that card, such as rarity. 4
•	 Magics have a game text box  that 
describes their special abilities.

5

- 9 -



Game Zones
In Sorcery: Contested Realm, players share the main and biggest part of the play area—the realm. 
However, each player has their own decks, cemetery, and hand. These are the game’s main zones.

The Realm
The realm  is a 5x4 square grid where most cards 
are played. These twenty squares begin as pieces 
of the void that you and your opponent may fill in 
with sites as you expand your domains. 

1
Atlas and Spellbook
Each player has two decks of cards—an atlas of at 
least 30 site cards , containing maps to domains 
waiting to be explored, and a spellbook of at 
least 50 spell cards , filled with all of a player’s 
accumulated magical knowledge. Players will draw 
cards from these decks over the course of a game.
When it comes to these decks, keep a few things 
in mind:

•	 The exact order of the cards in these decks is 
unpredictable, thus whenever you search your 
atlas or spellbook for a card, you must shuffle 
it afterward.
•	 Some effects allow you to place or reorder 2
known cards on the bottoms or tops of decks. 
After doing so, you do not shuffle it. 3

Cemetery
Each player has a cemetery  which represents a 
record of spent magic, dead minions, and broken 
artifacts. Whenever any of your cards are discarded, 
destroyed, resolved, or otherwise expired, place 
them face-up in your cemetery.
Players may freely examine the contents of any 
cemetery at any time and the order of the cards in 
a cemetery is irrelevant.

Hand 4
Cards drawn from your spellbook or atlas decks 
are kept in your hand . Your hand should remain 
hidden from your opponents, however the number 
of atlas and spellbook cards you hold may be 
observed and asked, due to the card backs being 
distinguishable.
There is no maximum hand size and the order of 
the cards in your hand is irrelevant.

5
- 10 -



Setup
Now that you’re familiar with the components, follow these steps to set up a two-player game of Sorcery.

Step 1: Set Up the Realm Step 4: Determine First Player
Clear some space in the middle of the table for Players may either decide who has the first turn, 
the realm . or otherwise randomly choose who goes first.

Step 2: Place Avatars Step 5: Draw Starting Hand
Players place their Avatars on the square in the Each player draws three cards from their atlas 
middle of their bottom row . and three cards from their spellbook . If you’re 

not satisfied with your initial hand, you may take 
Step 3: Prepare Decks one mulligan. 
Players shuffle and place their atlas and To take a mulligan, return up to three cards from 
spellbook decks nearby , leaving some space your hand to the bottom of their respective decks 
for their cemeteries . in any order. Then redraw the same number of 

cards you returned from each deck.

2

1
3

2
5 4

Winning the Game
The game ends when a player has vanquished all opposing Avatars, securing their hold on the realm! In 
order to do this, you’ll need to get them to death’s door, then follow up with a death blow.
Alternatively, if either player attempts to draw a card from an empty deck, they immediately lose.

Death’s Door & Death Blow
As an Avatar loses life, its connection with the realm weakens. When an Avatar’s life is reduced to 0, 
they are now at death’s door and can no longer gain life. At that moment, the wounded Avatar becomes 
immune to damage for the rest of the turn.
After that brief and desperate window, any damage dealt to the Avatar is a death blow, finally severing 
their connection to the realm and signaling their defeat.

- 11 -



Navigating the Realm
In Sorcery: Contested Realm battles are often won or lost in the way you position and maneuver your 
units. The following pages will cover how to navigate both the square grid and the layers of the realm.

Areas of the Realm
The realm is split into twenty squares. These squares begin as pieces of the void that you and your 
opponent may fill in with sites as you expand your domains.

The Void
The void is a region of incorporeal nothingness on top of which you will build your physical domain. 
Any minion that somehow finds its way into the void (whether in whole or in part) is immediately 
banished (removed from the game) unless it has an ability that specifically allows it to exist there (such 
as Voidwalk).

Sites
As you and your opponent expand your domains, you will replace void squares by playing site cards on 
them. These sites will form up to create bodies of water and land for your units to traverse and conquer. 

Water and Land Sites
Sites can be separated into two main types. Water sites are identified by the water threshold icon (marked 
with  ). All other sites are considered land sites, including sites with no threshold icons and rubble.

Groups of Water & Land
As sites are played, they will begin to 
form bodies of water and spans of land. A 
contiguous cluster of adjacent water sites 
is known as a body of water. Similarly, a 
contiguous cluster of adjacent land sites 
forms a span of land. It is possible to have 
more than one of each, or for the realm to 1 4
be completely land or water. 

For example, the two Spring Rivers and the 
Aqueduct form a body of water (1). Even 
though the Aqueduct has a  icon, it also 
has a , so it is a water site.
The Autumn River is a separate, single- 3 2
site body of water (2), since only adjacent 
sites are considered and not those placed 
diagonally.
The Steppe and Dark Tower form a span 
of land (3), and the Arid Desert is its own 
single-site span of land (4).

- 12 -



Surface & Subsurface of Sites
Each site is made up of two levels, above and below the card. A site’s upper level is generally referred to 
as the surface and its lower one is the subsurface. 

The Surface
The upper level of all sites form a region known as the surface. This is where units will typically move 
and wage war on the enemy. All units above a site are considered to be on the surface.

The Subsurface
The subsurface is divided into two regions, depending on what type of site it is. The lower level of a land 
site is part of the underground region. Similarly, the lower level of a water site, is part of the  underwater 
region. Existing in the subsurface is extremely hazardous and minions that somehow find their way there 
immediately die, unless otherwise allowed to do so with special abilities (see page 38).  

Atop and Under
When cards enter a site’s surface level, place it atop the site to show that it is on the surface, or slide it 
under the site to show that it occupies the subsurface. 
If a card refers to something atop a site, it applies to something on the surface of the site, but not 
anything below it. Similarly, if a card refers to something under a site, it applies to something in the 
subsurface of the site, but not anything above it.

Regions
Altogether, there are four regions in the game: 

•	 void 
•	 surface 
•	 underground
•	 underwater

Note: Most abilities from cards in the realm affect things within the region where the card is located. Similarly, 
in the case of spells, their affects typically apply to the same region as its Spellcaster. However, some cards can 
effect specific areas, regions, or even the whole realm, regardless of the card’s own region.  

For example: 
The Porcupine Pufferfish (1) 
occupies the Underwater region 
under the site in its square. 2 5
The Headless Haunt (2) occupies 
a square in the Void region. 1
The Cave Trolls (3) occupy the 
Underground region under the 
site in its square.
The Sea Serpent (4) and 3
Diluvian Kraken (5) occupy the 
Surface region atop the sites in 6 4
their squares, as does the King of 
the Realm (6) atop the site in his 
square.

- 13 -



Locating Areas of the Realm
Perhaps the single most important key concept to understand is how to identify areas in the realm 
relative to your card’s position.  

Location
A location is defined as one region in one square.

Here and There
“Here” and “There” are used to contextually refer to the location(s) that a card occupies. For most cards, 
such as avatars, minions, and artifacts, that means one location. For most auras, it means the 2x2 area 
they occupy. For sites, it means two locations, their surface and subsurface.

Targeting 
Sometimes you will need to target things in the realm. Spells and abilities can only target things within 
the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s same region. 

Adjacent and Nearby
Sometimes a card will need to identify something in an adjacent or nearby square. 

•	 Adjacent: Refers to the card’s own square, and the squares that it shares a border with. 
•	 Nearby: Refers to the card’s own square, and all squares that surround it, including those 
diagonally. 

These five squares are These nine squares are 
adjacent to the card nearby the card

- 14 -



Adjacent and Nearby Locations
Only locations that are in the same region as the referencing card (or its Spellcaster) are considered 
adjacent or nearby locations. 

4 3
6

5
1 2

In this example, the King of the Realm  is beset The Cave Trolls  are not adjacent to the King 
by enemies on nearly all sides! Some pose a greater because they are burrowed and are therefore 
threat than others. Let’s take a closer look. in a different region. Similarly, the Porcupine 
The King is adjacent to the Sea Serpent Pufferfish  is not nearby the King because it is 
because it is next to him on the surface of the site submerged. 
and therefore in the same region. Similarly, the The Pufferfish and Cave Trolls are not adjacent 
Diluvian Kraken  is nearby the King. to each other as they are in different regions, 
The King is not adjacent to the Headless Haunt  underwater and underground, respectively. 

 because the Haunt is in the Void region. Similarly, the Pufferfish is not adjacent to the 
Headless Haunt, nor are the Cave Trolls nearby 
the Headless Haunt. 

Steps 
A step is the minimum unit of distance between two adjacent locations. Some card abilities will have 
an effect that will happen a step away or even several steps away from where the card is or its origin 
point. In these cases, it will say that it happens X steps away.

- 15 -



Turn Summary
Sorcery: Contested Realm is played over a series of turns. Players take their turns, one at a time, following 
this sequence of phases:

Start Phase
The start phase is the first phase you complete during your turn. All abilities that last “Until next turn” 
now end. Then: 

Step 1.	 All of your cards that are tapped now untap.
Step 2.	 All of your sites now provide their mana for this turn. 
Step 3.	 Trigger abilities that happen at the start of the turn. 
Step 4.	 Finally, draw a card from either your spellbook or atlas.

Main Phase
The main phase is where most of Sorcery’s actions and events take place. During this phase, your units 
can be ordered to do two types of actions. They can:

•	 Cast a spell from your hand if they are a spellcaster (see page 17) or,
•	 Activate one of their abilities (see page 20)

You may have your units do these as many times as you have resources to do so, and in any order you like. 
For example, you might move a minion, then cast a spell with your Avatar, and then move another minion.

End Phase
The end phase is the last phase you complete during your turn.

Step 1.	 Trigger abilities that happen at the end of the turn.
Step 2.	 Players remove all damage from their minions in the realm.
Step 3.	 Effects that last for your turn now end. 
Step 4.	 Your turn ends. 

Note: Avatars do not heal automatically at the end of the turn in the same way as damage is removed from 
minions, however they can heal using spells and other card effects.

Your First Turn
No Card Draw (First Player)
If you are the first player to take a turn in the game, skip Step 4 of the Start Phase. 
Establishing Your Domain
During your first Main Phase, your Avatar needs to establish their domain within the realm. To do 
this, you must use your Avatar’s ability to play a site to your Avatar’s square.

- 16 -



Casting Spells
Spells are the main way Avatars and other Spellcasters influence the realm. Any card in your hand that is 
not a site is a spell. You cast these spells to summon minions, conjure artifacts or auras, and invoke magics. 
To cast a spell from your hand, you need to identify a Spellcaster under your control to cast it. The 
Spellcaster and its location are by whom and where the spell is being cast. Once you have identified the 
Spellcaster, spells often have two requirements to play: a mana cost and an elemental threshold.

Mana
All of your Spellcasters use mana to cast their spells and some abilities may also draw from this power. 
You can only gain mana during your turn and lose any unspent mana at the end of your turn.

Gaining Mana
At the start of your turn, all of your sites provide one mana each, forming a mana pool for you to draw from. 
When one of your sites enters the realm, it immediately provides one mana. If you lose a site, the mana it 
provided this turn is not removed from your mana pool. If you gain control of an enemy’s site during your 
turn, it does not provide you with mana until your next turn.
Other card types might also provide mana turn-after-turn in a manner similar to sites, or simply increase 
your pool for the current turn.

Using Mana
Spells cost mana to cast. This is identified by the card’s mana cost in the upper left hand corner. To cast that 
spell, you must be able to pay the cost from your available mana. You cannot pay a mana cost if the amount 
required exceeds the mana available.  

For example, your sites each 
provide one mana that you 
can spend this turn . 2
Currently, that number 
is three. Note that your 
opponent’s Aqueduct 
does not provide you mana 

. In your hand , you 
have some minions and a site. 1
You could play both the Sedge 
Crabs and Polar Explorers as 3
their total mana cost is three. 
You don’t currently have enough mana to play Captain 
Baldassare with his mana cost of four. However, you do 1
have a site, Maelström, that you can play using your Avatar’s 
ability . Playing Maelström would bring your total 1
available mana up to four, allowing you to play Captain 
Baldassare, saving the Crabs and Explorers for a later turn. 4

- 17 -



Elemental Threshold
In addition to mana, you will often need to meet an elemental threshold to cast most spells or use 
some abilities. Spells and some abilities will have one or more elemental symbols (  for fire,  for air, 

 for water, and  for earth) next to the mana cost on spells, or to the left of abilities in text boxes. 
To play that card or use that ability, you must have at least as many matching symbols on the sites you 
control, plus any others granted by spells or abilities. 
Elemental threshold is not spent like mana. It is simply a minimum affinity you must have for the 
specified elements to use some cards. All artifacts and most abilities have no threshold at all, so you 
need only to ensure that you can pay any associated costs to make use of them.

For example, your Floodplain, 
Autumn River, and Maelström 
sites each grant you one 
affinity , however Boneyard 3
does not . So your affinity is 
currently three . Note that 
your opponent’s Aqueduct does 
not grant you affinity . 
In your hand , you have 
some minions, including Adept 
Illusionist and Polar Explorers, 4 1 1
both of which you want to play this turn. 
Because elemental affinity is not spent or lost when 
playing cards, you just need to check each card’s 
elemental threshold and see if your affinity is equal to or 
greater than the threshold. This means that you can play 
both the Illusionist and Explorers this turn since they each 1
only require a threshold of two  , compared to your 
affinity of three . 2

Mulitiple Element Threshold
Some spells might require affinity with 
different elements. Like with other spells, you 
must be able to meet all of a spell’s required 
threshold in order to cast it. So for example, to 
cast Sir Pelleas, you’ll need to control sites with 
at least one Air and two Water threshold symbols. 
Cards that have different element symbols 
count as a spell of each of those affinities. So Sir 
Pelleas is both an Air spell and a Water spell at 
the same time.

- 18 -



Casting Minions
When a minion spell has been cast, it summons the minion under your control atop any of your sites, 
and they remain in the realm until something causes them to leave play. 
Note: There is no limit to the number of minions that may occupy the same site, though it’s rarely a good 
idea to concentrate your forces in just one spot!

Summoning Sickness
A unit that entered the realm this turn, whether from being cast or from another card’s effect, suffers 
from summoning sickness until the end of turn as it prepares for battle. A unit suffering from summoning 
sickness cannot tap, or be tapped, to pay for costs associated with any ability. This includes any additional 
abilities that may have been granted by spells and artifacts. 
Note: When you summon a unit on your turn, it enters play untapped, so you may use it to defend on your 
opponent’s turn.

Casting Artifacts
When an artifact spell is cast, it is conjured into the realm atop any site you control or directly into the 
waiting hands of one of your units. A unit can carry any number of artifacts.

Casting Auras
When an aura spell is cast, it conjures the aura at the intersection of four squares, though some specify 
the border between two, or even just a single square. Auras are said to occupy the surface of any sites at 
those squares, as well as any void, affecting them (or other things located at those sites) in some way. 

Casting Magics
Magics are the only cards in the game that do not enter play when they are cast, and do not have a lasting 
presence in the realm. A magic spell simply does what it says it does, and then goes to its owner’s cemetery. 

- 19 -



Activating Abilities
Avatars, minions, artifacts, and auras may all have abilities that can be activated simply by stating your 
intention to do so, making any relevant choices (like picking targets), and paying any associated costs. 
Unlike spells, which use mana costs most often, abilities will use a variety of costs including things like 
tapping, paying life, sacrificing a minion, or discarding cards, among other things. Only the controller 
of a card can use its activated abilities, and only during the main phase of their own turn when nothing 
else is already happening.
Tapping a Card
Cards in the realm can be tapped as a resource, 1
spending their energy as a cost to activate various 
abilities. Tap abilities are usually written as, 
“Tap → Ability text.”
A player may also need to tap a card as a cost 
related to other spells or abilities on other cards.
To tap a card, turn it 90° to the right from its 
upright position . A card that has been turned 
90° in this way is “tapped,” while an upright card is 
“untapped.” Cards can also untap at certain points 
in the game. To do that, simply turn it 90° to the 
left back into its upright position .  
Note: Players can only tap untapped cards and 
untap tapped cards. 2
Reminder: Minions that you have summoned this 
turn have Summoning Sickness and cannot be 
tapped to pay for the costs of abilities.

Playing Sites
Sites come into play through your Avatar’s activated ability: “Tap → Play or draw a site” . However, 
there are some other cards that can bring them into play as well. 
When you play a site, it must be placed: 

•	 on void  or rubble , and
•	 adjacent to another site that you control  or as close as possible to your Avatar if you control 
no sites.

There can only be one site per grid square, which means sites are generally placed on an adjacent void, 
permanently extending the physical boundaries of your domain within the realm. Sites can also be 
played on rubble, replacing it entirely.

1 2

4 3
- 20 -



Basic Abilities
All units (Avatars and minions) have access to five basic abilities that are not printed on their card. 
Three are activated abilities that allow them to interact with the realm. These are: Move and Attack, 
which is the ability you’ll use most often; and Pick Up and Drop, which relate to carrying artifacts.
The remaining two are triggered abilities that units can perform during the opponent’s turn. These 
abilities are called Defend and Intercept, and are described below alongside their triggers.

Move and Attack
Every unit can tap to activate the Move and Attack ability, which allows it to optionally move, then 
optionally attack something at its location. When using this ability, declare the intended movement path 
and resolve it. After resolving all the movement, then decide if you attack at that location (see page 22). 
Moving your Units
When moving a unit, its journey is broken down into individual steps. By default, units can move one 
step. However, some abilities allow units to take additional steps (such as Movement +X) and other 
abilities allow units to take steps diagonally or even into different regions (see page 13).
To move a unit using the Move and Attack ability, you first declare each step the unit will take, and then 
you resolve the steps in order. When you declare movement, the only restriction is that you may not 
repeat specific steps. 
Normally, this means that you will simply declare a single step, from the surface of one site to the surface 
of an adjacent site. 

For example, your Amazon Warriors 
1 have tapped to use their Move and 

Attack ability  and you declare a 
step from the surface of the Rustic 
Village to the surface of the Holy 
Ground .

2

If your units have movement-enhancing abilities, or there are movement modifying effects in play, you 
might choose to declare a more complex path. As you resolve each step, you confirm that it is a legal step 
at that moment. If it is not legal, you do not take that step, and continue resolving anything remaining.
If your unit takes at least one step, it has moved; if it takes zero steps, it has not moved.

“Take a Step” verses “X Steps Away”
If an effect instructs a unit to take a step or move one step, the unit may modify its step via abilities like 
Airborne, Voidwalk, Burrowing, and Submerge. 
If a card instructs you to pick a target up to X steps away, you cannot apply movement abilities; you 
simply count one adjacent square per step, without changing regions.

- 21 -



Attacking the Enemy
You may only attack enemy units or the surface of enemy sites that are at your location. When using the 
Move and Attack basic ability, you must resolve any movement before declaring and resolving your attack. 
As you resolve the attack, you confirm it is a legal target at that moment, and if so, your unit has attacked.

Attacking
For example, the Amazon 
Warriors tap  to declare 

2 a Move and Attack. The 
Amazon Warriors first 
declare and resolve their 
movement . Once they’re 
done moving, they have the 
option to attack.

1
Attacking Enemy Units
If you attack an enemy unit, either as your original intent, or because your opponent defended (see 
page 24), the units involved will fight. To fight, units strike each other simultaneously. When a unit 
strikes, it deals damage equal to its power. 

Fight and Strike
Carrying on from the example 
above, the Amazon Warriors and 
Rimland Nomads now fight, striking 
each other simultaneously . 3
The Amazon Warriors deal five 
damage to the Rimland Nomads 
who deal two damage in return. 

Striking First
Some units may be able to land their blows before their enemy can respond. Units that strike first resolve 
their strikes before their target can resolve theirs. If multiple units in the same fight are able to strike 
first, they all strike at the same time. Then any surviving units without that ability make their strikes.
Multiple Combatants
If more than two units are involved in a fight (usually as a result of intercepting or defending), the 
controller of each side may allocate their units’ damage among the enemy as they wish.

Minions with Split Power
Some minions have their Power split into an 
offensive value, or Attack Power and a defensive 
value, known as Defense Power. When it strikes, 
use the first one, and when damage is being 
allocated to them, use the second. Attack Power is noted on 
Cards that modify a unit’s Power do so to both the left over the sword, 
Attack and Defense Power, so for example and Defense Power is on 
Overpower will increase both Attack and Defense the right over the shield.
Power by two.

- 22 -



Damage to Minions 
Damage dealt to minions persists until the end of the turn. A minion that accumulates damage greater 
than or equal to its power immediately dies and is placed in its owner’s cemetery. 
Note: Zero damage is not any damage at all, so units with 0 power must take at least 1 damage to die.

4 5

Continuing our attack example, the Amazon Warriors suffer two damage from the Rimland Nomads . 
While this does not kill them, if they take three more damage this turn, they will die. On the other hand, 
the Nomads suffer five damage , well exceeding its power of two and so it immediately dies . 

Damage to Avatars 
Throughout the game, you track your Avatar’s life. Damage dealt to an Avatar with one or more life 
reduces their life by that amount. Damage dealt to an Avatar on death’s door causes a death blow (see 
page 11) and ends the game.
Attacking the Surface of an Enemy Site
If you attack the surface of an enemy site and your opponent doesn’t defend, simply strike the site, 
damaging it and causing the controlling Avatar to lose that much life. Importantly, attacking a site cannot 
deliver a death blow because it causes the controlling Avatar to lose life, not take damage directly. You 
can still attack the sites of an Avatar at death’s door, but it will not usually affect them.

For example, the Amazon 
1 Warriors attack your 

opponent’s undefended 
Red Desert  striking 

-5 3 it for 5 damage . Your 
opponent’s Avatar of Fire 

2 then loses five life . 
Remember: Losing life 
like this is not damage. 

- 23 -



Defend
Defend is one of two basic abilities that you can use on your opponent’s turn, because it is a triggered 
ability (the other is Intercept, described on page 25).
When an enemy attacks another unit or site in your unit’s range of motion, your unit may tap to defend, 
moving to the attack’s location and joining the fight. Any number of units may defend against an attacker. 
During this movement a defending unit may use any of its movement abilities, such as Airborne, 
Burrowing, Movement +X, Submerge, or Voidwalk.
If the original target of the attack was a unit, the defender’s controller may decide if that unit remains in 
the fight, or is removed. If the original target was a site, it is automatically removed.
Remember: Only “attacks” can be defended; attacks are only caused by the Move and Attack basic ability, 
or very specific card text that uses the word “attack.”

1

2

In this example, let’s say that your Rimland Nomads are attacked by the Amazon Warriors again. But 
this time you have an untapped Sand Worm at an adjacent site. You can then tap your Sand Worm  
and move it to the location of the Rimland Nomads  to defend them. 
You can then decide to remove the Nomads from the ensuing fight. If they remain, they will be involved 
in the battle and your opponent will be able to allocate damage to them. However this may be a good 
idea since together the Sand Worm and Nomads can take down the Amazon Warriors. If you choose 
to remove the Nomads, they cannot be allocated damage, but will leave the Sand Worm to take on the 
Warriors alone.

- 24 -



Intercept
Intercept is one of two basic abilities that you can use on your opponent’s turn, because it is a triggered 
ability (the other ability is Defend, described on page 24).
When an enemy using the Move and Attack ability finishes its movement and then chooses not to attack, 
any of your units there may tap to intercept and fight that enemy.
Units can not move when they intercept. They must already be at the enemy’s location.

Intercept
1 For example, your opponent’s 

Seasoned Sellsword minion has 
tapped  to use its Move and 
Attack ability, moving to the 
Rustic Village and then choosing 
not to attack.  Now the untapped 
Amazon Warriors can intercept, 
forcing the Seasoned Sellsword 
into a fight .

2

Pick Up or Drop Artifacts
Each unit can activate their Pick Up basic ability once per turn, which allows it to pick up any number of 
artifacts at locations it occupies.
The Drop basic ability allows a unit to drop any number of artifacts it’s carrying. Each unit can activate 
the Drop basic ability once per turn, as long as it hasn’t interacted with the realm this turn. See the 
Glossary for “interact.”

Carrying Artifacts 
A unit can carry any number of artifacts, which will move with the unit throughout the realm. If a unit 
is carrying any artifacts when it leaves the realm, the artifacts are dropped. If a unit and an artifact it is 
carrying stop sharing a location due to some effect, the artifact ceases to be carried.

Controlling Artifacts
Artifacts carried by a unit are controlled by the player who controls that unit. Artifacts that could be 
carried but are not currently being carried are uncontrolled. Artifacts that cannot be carried normally 
(e.g. Automatons and Monuments) are controlled by the player who conjured them.

- 25 -



Building Your Own Decks
Sorcery: Contested Realm is a customizable trading card game, which means that you can choose what 
cards go into your deck. When you’re ready to construct your own deck, there are a few rules you must 
follow to build decks fit for play: 

•	 You need to choose and include exactly one Avatar 
card.
•	 Your Atlas must contain at least 30 site cards.
•	 Your Spellbook must contain at least 50 spell cards.

You may have larger decks as long as you can reasonably 
shuffle them. 

Rarity
The type line of a spell or site describes the card’s 
rarity . This tells you how many copies of that 
card you can have in your deck. Each player may 
include: 1

•	 up to four copies of any ordinary cards
•	 up to three copies of any exceptional cards
•	 up to two copies of any elite cards
•	 only one copy of any unique cards in a deck

Your Avatar does not count toward any of those 
totals, and is not in that sense a part of either of 
your decks.

- 26 -



Advanced Concepts
Special Abilities
Most cards in Sorcery have one or more special abilities printed in their game text box that change the 
default rules of the game or grant new interactions outside of the basic abilities.

Passive Ability Keyword Ability
A passive ability has an ongoing effect that A keyword is a word or phrase that functions as 
is always active, as long as the card is in the shorthand for a longer piece of rules text. They 
relevant game zone. Typically, this zone will be are used to communicate concepts that require 
the realm, but some cards have abilities that more text than what will fit on a card. You can 
specify things they do, or enable you to do, while find these longer explanations in the glossary on 
in your hand, or while in the cemetery, etc. page 32.

Activated Ability Triggered Ability
An activated ability takes effect simply by stating A triggered ability requires that a specified 
your intention to do so and paying any related condition is met, or a specified event occurs, to 
costs, such as tapping or spending mana. By automatically take effect. These abilities can be 
default, only the controller of a card can use recognized by their use of words such as “when,” 
its activated abilities, and only during the main “whenever,” and “at [a specified moment],” 
phase of their own turn, when nothing else is though a few cards have nonstandard wording 
already happening. due to space constraints.

- 27 -



Advanced Movement Concepts
Entering a Location, Site, or Void
A unit is said to have entered a location, site, or a void if it was not occupying that particular spot, and 
now it is (even if just for a moment as a result of Movement +X, for example), or when it was summoned 
or conjured there.

Teleporting
Teleportation effects move a unit directly to a specified location without taking any steps in between.

Moving Freely
Some cards can move freely within the realm or in a defined area. When a unit uses the Move and Attack 
or Defend abilities they spend no steps when moving, as long as the starting and ending locations of the 
step satisfy the moves freely condition.

Special Movement Effects
Some effects will push, pull, or drag things, or simply cause them to be moved. This is forced movement, 
and is not modified by a unit’s abilities, such as Airborne, Burrowing, Submerge, or Voidwalk. Units 
that cannot move by activating their own abilities, can still be moved by other cards and effects.
If an effect causes a unit to ‘take a step’ or ‘take up to X steps’ this is not forced movement, and the unit 
can modify these steps with their abilities. Units that cannot move by activating their own abilities, also 
cannot carry out any steps granted by these effects.
Note: A unit that is made to move, either by a spell’s effect or is otherwise forcibly moved does not tap and 
cannot be intercepted, as it is not moving as part of the Move and Attack basic ability.

When Sites Move
If a site moves to another square, everything atop and under it 
moves with it (however, those cards are not considered to have 
moved). Generally, a site can only move or be moved to a square 
without another site – a void. Any cards in that void are now placed 
atop the site that was moved in.

Carrying Units
Some units can carry other units. A unit with this ability, picks them 
up or drops them in the same manner and time as it would artifacts 
(see page 25). Units that have Airborne, Burrowing, Submerge, 
or Voidwalk confer those abilities to units they are carrying while 
they are carried. 
A unit being carried may still cast spells or activate abilities as normal. 
If the carried unit moves to a location that the carrying unit doesn’t 
occupy, the unit ceases to be carried.

- 28 -



Damage Grids
Some cards have abilities that deal damage or otherwise affect units 
or multiple sites over a wide area. To simplify rules text and illustrate 
the extent of these spells, some cards contain a damage grid in their 
rules box.
Damage grids may use a bold square to indicate the center of the 
card’s effect, or a dot to show the Spellcaster’s location on the grid.
By default, a damage grid indicates that the ability deals damage to 
each unit at locations within the area of effect and within the same 
region, though cards may specify otherwise.

Occupying Multiple Sites
Units normally occupy only one location while in the realm, 
however some units may occupy multiple locations at once due to 
their enormous size. Such oversized units follow the regular rules 
for summoning, so you choose a single site you control when you 
cast the minion spell. As they enter the realm, you choose a 2x2 
area that it can legally occupy, which must include the summoning 
location. To represent the minion’s locations, place the card at the 
intersection of those sites. 
An oversized unit is at each of the sites (or void squares) that it 
occupies, so it can be standing on both land and water sites (or 
void squares) at the same time. Therefore, if grid damage is dealt to 
multiple such locations, oversized units take damage equal to the 
sum of the damage dealt on all of the locations they occupy.
The same applies in general for any effect that checks whether 
something is true about an oversized unit’s site. 
When an oversized unit moves, you choose a direction and all parts 
of it move in that direction. If any part of it can’t move in the chosen 
direction, then it can’t move in that direction at all.
When attacking, oversized units still target only a single enemy or site.

Teleporting Oversized Units
When an oversized unit is teleported, it must be to a location or set of locations that conforms to its 
size restrictions and is otherwise legal for that unit to occupy.

- 29 -



Ownership and Control
You have ownership of all of the cards you bring to a game of Sorcery. You are, therefore, the owner 
of those cards. The owner of a card does not change during the game. A card is always returned to its 
owner’s hand, shuffled into its owner’s deck, or sent to its owner’s cemetery regardless of who controls 
the card when it leaves play.
While the owner of a card is most often its controller, control of cards in play may change over the 
course of a game. When rules text uses phrases like “your minions” or “your sites,” that refers to those 
things that you control, and not to those things that you own.

Projectiles
A projectile’s flight begins at the shooting unit’s location 
and travels within the same region in a cardinal direction. 
Its flight continues until it either reaches the edge of its 
region or it reaches the first unit (enemy or ally) along its 
path, ignoring any allies at the projectile’s starting location. 
Different projectiles will have different effects, but will most 
often deal damage to the impacted unit.
In the event of multiple valid units, the player that fired the 
projectile chooses which unit the projectile hits.

Cardinal directions from the card

2
1

3

1 1

1 4
For example, your Lava Salamander casts a Firebolts spell to the right towards the opponent’s House 
Arn Bannerman . Each of the three projectiles travel in the chosen cardinal direction, starting at 
the Salamander’s location and travelling over the Arid Desert, avoiding the  burrowed Cave Trolls, 
which are not in the same region . When they arrive at the Rustic Village, you can have the first 
two projectiles hit the Bannerman, which suffers two damage and dies . Unfortunately, the third 
projectile then hits your own Seasoned Sellsword , since projectiles hit friend and foe alike!

Static/Ongoing Effects
Auras and minions with passive abilites will have an ongoing impact on the realm. These static effects 
should be applied at all times, even while resolving other effects or actions, and take precedence over 
triggered abilities.

- 30 -



The Storyline
When the story being told during a game of Sorcery starts to get complicated, particularly when multiple 
abilities trigger at the same time, you can use the Storyline to help resolve them.
A Storyline begins each time a unit casts a spell or activates an ability at which point one or more 
events are placed at the relevant points on the Storyline and are then resolved in order, one at a time. 
Sometimes, the resolution of a spell, effect, or event will cause it to split into several smaller events (eg. 
the individual steps within a unit’s movement), which are each placed on the Storyline at their relevant 
points before the Storyline continues to play out.
Target units or locations must be chosen as an event is being added to the Storyline, otherwise an event 
only needs more detail when it comes time to resolve it.

For example, your Ghost Ship taps 
to use the Move and Attack ability 

, adding it to the Storyline. As 1
the ability resolves, you declare 
and resolve their movement. 
After movement, you decide to 
attack the Autumn River .

Ghost Ship Move & Attack
Ghost Ship Ghost Ship 

moves: void 13 attacks: 2
to surface 12 Autumn River

Triggered Abilities
If the resolution of one event triggers an ability, a new event will be inserted into the storyline. The new 
event is added at the current moment, temporarily interrupting any remaining events on the Storyline. 
Once this new event has been resolved, the story will continue.
If multiple events are competing to be added at the same point on the Storyline, the non-active player 
places their events first, then the active player places their events on the Storyline after them. If either 
player has multiple events of their own, they can place them in whatever order they wish.

Your Ghost Ship’s movement has 
resolved , triggering both its 
summon ability and the hunting 4 4
instincts of the opponent’s Giant 3
Shark .
As the non-active player, your 
opponent places their ability on 
the storyline first .

3 Giant Shark Giant Shark Ghost Ship 
Ghost Ship moves: surface fights: summons a Ghost Ship 

moves: void 13 11 to 12 Ghost Ship spirit attacks: 
to surface 12 5

If a card leaves the realm, any of its events stay on the Storyline but are unable to resolve. If any event is 
unable to resolve when it comes up, simply ignore it and continue to the next event.

- 31 -



Glossary of Terms and Keywords
[X]bound Burrowing 
This minion is disabled while not occupying a This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, and 
certain type of location. For example, a minion operate normally underground. When taking 
with Waterbound is disabled while not occupying a step, it can instead move from the surface of a 
a water location, etc. land site to the underground level there, or vice 

versa. 
Adjacent 
Refers to the card’s own square, and the squares Cardinal Directions
that it shares a border with. When a card talks about a cardinal direction, it 

includes all of the squares in the direction indicated 
Airborne on the card to the front, rear, left and right.
This unit may fly while on the surface, gaining the 
following benefits: Carrying Units
When taking a step this unit may move diagonally Some units can carry other units. A unit with 
and can only be intercepted by other units if they this ability, picks them up or drops them in the 
have Airborne or Ranged. same manner and time as it would artifacts (see 
This unit cannot be targeted by attacks, unless the page 25). Units that have Airborne, Burrowing, 
attacking unit has the Airborne ability. Submerge, or Voidwalk confer those abilities to 

units they are carrying while they are carried. 
Ally/Allied A unit being carried may still cast spells or activate 
A unit that you control (including your Avatar). abilities as normal. If the carried unit moves to a 

location that the carrying unit doesn’t occupy, the 
Banish unit ceases to be carried.
Remove from the game.

Charge
Body of Water This unit can tap, or be tapped, to pay for costs 
A contiguous cluster of adjacent water sites. associated with any ability on the turn it is 

summoned.
Broken
Broken cards are artifacts that can be found in any Conjure
cemetery. When a card is conjured, put it directly into play.

- 32 -



Damage and Life Loss Elite
Generally, units take damage from fighting and You may include two copies of a card that has the 
from the effects of spells and abilities. Damage keyword “Elite” in its type line.
dealt to minions accumulates until the end of turn 
when it is healed, while damage dealt to an Avatar Enemy
causes them to lose life instead. Sometimes an A unit (including Avatars) that is controlled by an 
Avatar will suffer life loss directly from things like opponent.
a site being successfully attacked. Exceptional
When a minion has damage on it equal to or greater 
than its power, it dies. You may include three copies of a card that has the 

keyword “Exceptional” in its type line.
Note: When an Avatar is at death’s door, only 
damage will deliver a death blow. Fight
Dead When two units fight, they strike each other 

simultaneously.
Dead cards are minions that can be found in any 
cemetery. If more than two units are involved in a fight, the 

controller of each side may allocate their units’ 
Death Blow damage among the enemy as they wish.
When an Avatar is at death’s door, any damage Flooded
dealt to them is a death blow, signaling their defeat. A flooded site has a minimum of one water affinity 
Death’s Door , in addition to any other affinities it provides. 
When an Avatar’s life is reduced to 0, they are now Therefore, it’s a water site.
at death’s door and can no longer gain life. At that Genesis
moment, the Avatar becomes immune to damage 
for the rest of the current turn. After that brief When this card enters the realm, do what is stated.
and desperate window, any damage dealt to the Ground Movement
Avatar is a death blow, ending the game. Ground movement is any step that a unit takes 
Deathrite between the surface of two sites (except Airborne 
When this unit dies, do what is stated before placing and teleportation).
it in the cemetery. Here & There
Dies, Destroyed, & Killed “Here” and “There” refer to the location(s) that 
When a card dies, is destroyed, or is killed place it in a card occupies. For most cards, such as avatars, 
the cemetery. minions, and artifacts, that means one location. 

For most auras, it means the 2x2 area they occupy. 
Disable For sites, it means two locations, their surface and 
While disabled, a minion loses all abilities subsurface. 
(including basic abilities like Move and Attack), Immobile
doesn’t strike when fighting, can’t cast spells, and 
can’t take any action granted by another card or This unit can’t take steps.
effect (ie. strike, shoot a projectile, take a step, etc.). Interact
A disabled minion can still be forcibly moved or A unit interacts with the realm if it strikes, deals 
tapped by effects. damage, casts a spell, or activates a special ability.
Elemental Affinity and Threshold
Sites and other cards provide elemental affinity 
(e.g. ). Elemental threshold is the 
minimum affinity required to cast a given spell, or 
to trigger or activate some abilities. 

- 33 -



Lance Moves Freely
A minion with the Lance keyword enters play When this unit uses the Move and Attack or Defend 
carrying a lance artifact token. They could use it for abilities they spend no steps when moving, as long 
themselves or give it to another minion. The first as the starting and ending locations of the step 
time a unit strikes while carrying a lance, it deals satisfy the moves freely condition.
an extra damage and strikes first (see page  22) 
if in a fight. Then the lance breaks. Nearby 
Lance tokens are artifacts for all intents and Refers to the card’s own square, and all squares 
purposes. They can be picked up and dropped that surround it, including those diagonally. 
(and stolen), just like other artifacts. When they Ordinary
are broken, they are removed from the realm like You may include four copies of a card that has the 
other tokens. keyword “Ordinary” in its type line.
Land Sites Projectiles
All sites that are not water sites are considered A projectile’s flight begins at the shooting unit’s 
land sites, including sites with no element icons location and travels within the same region in a 
and Rubble. cardinal direction. Its flight continues until it either 
Lethal reaches the edge of its region or it reaches the first 
Any strictly positive amount of damage this card unit (enemy or ally) along its path, ignoring any 
deals to a minion is enough to kill. allies at the projectile’s starting location. Different 

projectiles will have different effects, but will most 
Life often deal damage to the impacted unit.
Life represents the amount of damage that your In the event of multiple valid units, the player 
Avatar can endure before it is placed on death’s that fired the projectile chooses which unit the 
door. As your Avatar incurs damage, its overall life projectile hits.
will decrease accordingly.

Ranged X
Location This unit has “Tap → Shoot a projectile that stops 
The exact location of a card is determined by its after 1 (or X) steps. Strike the impacted unit”.
square and by the region that it occupies. This unit may also intercept Airborne units.
Mana Range of Motion
Mana can come from several sources, but sites are Every location a unit can reach if it used the Move 
the most common. When they first come into play and Attack basic ability.
as well as at the start of your turn, sites provide 
one mana each. Other cards might add to this total. Realm
You use this mana to cast spells or activate abilities. The realm includes all the squares in the game 
At the end of your turn, any remaining mana is lost, zone.
whether or not you used it that turn. Region
Movement +X There are four distinct regions in the realm: 
This unit may move up to X additional steps surface, underground, underwater, or in the void.
when using the Move and Attack  or Defend basic 
abilities. To move multiple steps at once, choose Rubble
a destination and a path to it then traverse that A site that has been destroyed is placed in its 
path one step at a time. You may need to resolve owner’s cemetery as normal, but rather than 
automatic triggers (or apply “always on” passive reverting back to the void, the site is instead 
abilities), some of which may prematurely stop the replaced with rubble. Rubble is a neutral land site 
motion of the unit. that no player controls, and provides no mana or 

threshold. 
Note: Use Rubble tokens or a face down site to 
represent rubble on a square.

- 34 -



Sacrifice Stealth 
Sacrificing is removing something you control Minions with Stealth cannot be targeted by spells 
from the realm and placing it directly in its or abilities from your opponents (including 
owner’s cemetery. A player may be forced to attacks), they can’t be intercepted, their attacks 
sacrifice something if an effect instructs them to can’t be defended, and projectiles cannot hit them. 
do so. When a minion is sacrificed, it does indeed Stealth is tracked with a stealth token, and it’s lost 
die, and its Deathrites trigger, if applicable. If after the minion interacts with the realm.
something is sacrificed to pay the cost of an ability, Non-minions cannot have Stealth. If a minion with 
it is not placed in the cemetery until after that Stealth becomes a non-minion, remove the Stealth 
ability has resolved. token.
A dying unit cannot be sacrificed. When a site 
is sacrificed, it is replaced by rubble. Even Step 
indestructible things can be sacrificed, if a cost A step is the minimum unit of distance between 
or effect otherwise informs you of the need to two adjacent locations. 
sacrifice something.

Storyline (see page 31)
Silence A sequence of events that is currently resolving. A 
A card that is silenced loses all printed and granted unit that casts a spell, or activates an ability will 
abilities. start a storyline and add events to it. Triggered 
Avatars cannot be silenced. abilities can insert events into a storyline during 

its resolution, interrupting future events.
Span of Land
A contiguous cluster of adjacent land sites. Strike

A unit deals damage equal to its power. 
Spellcaster
This card may cast spells. Strike First
Some spellcasters may only cast spells that match Units that strike first resolve their strikes before 
a specific element. For example, Fire Spellcasters their target can resolve theirs. If multiple units in 
may only cast spells that have a Fire threshold icon the same fight are able to strike first, they all strike 
(marked with  ). at the same time. Then any surviving units without 

that ability make their strikes.
Square
One grid square in the realm, that includes all 
cards present there. 

- 35 -



Stronger, Strongest, Weaker, and Transform
Weakest When a card is transformed it is considered 
Some effects compare the power of two units: the same game object as its previous version 

•	 Stronger: Strictly more power than. and therefore does not suffer from summoning 
sickness when it comes into play. If one card 

•	 Strongest: Strictly highest power. transforms into another card, the original card is 
•	 Weaker: Strictly less power than. removed from the game after the transformation.
•	 Weakest: Strictly lowest power.

In the case of ties, the active player chooses. Underground
When comparing a minion with split power, use The lower level of a land site is part of the 
the average of the two power values, rounding underground region.
down if needed. Underwater
Submerge The lower level of a water site is part of the 
This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, underwater region.
and operate normally underwater. When taking Unique
a step, it can instead move from the surface of a You may include one copy of a card that has the 
water site to the underwater level there or vice keyword “Unique” in its type line.
versa. 

Summon Units
Units are a collective term that includes Avatars 

When a card is summoned, put it directly into play. and minions.
Tapping a Card (see page 20) Void
Cards in the realm can be tapped as a cost to A square without a site is a part of the void region. 
activate various abilities. A player may also need Avatars can never enter void locations. Minions 
to tap a card as a cost related to other spells or there are banished unless they have Voidwalk. 
abilities on other cards.
To tap a card, turn a it 90° to the right, from an Voidwalk
upright position. Only untapped cards and tokens This unit can be summoned to any void location 
in play can be tapped. All of your cards in play and safely exist and operate there. When taking a 
automatically (and necessarily) untap at the start step it can move into an adjacent void, or out of 
of your turn. the void and onto the surface of an adjacent site 

(or directly to the subsurface if they can operate 
Target there). 
Sometimes you will need to target things in the 
realm. Spells and abilities can only target things Water Sites
within the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s Water sites are identified by the water icon marked 
same region. with  . All other sites are considered land sites, 

including sites with no threshold icons and rubble. 

- 36 -



Sorcery: Contested Realm
Quick Reference Guide

The Golden Rule Navigation Terms
Some text is intentionally informal or necessarily Regions: Surface, Underground, Underwater, and 
compact. Use common sense and be cool. the Void are all separate regions in the game. 

Location: The exact location of a card is 

The Four Elements determined by its square and by the region that 
it occupies.

Sorcery: Contested Realm is built around the four Here & There: “Here” and “There” refer to the 
classical elements: location(s) that a card occupies. For most cards, 

such as avatars, minions, and artifacts, that 
means one location. For most auras, it means 

Air Earth Fire Water the 2x2 area they occupy. For sites, it means two 
locations, their surface and subsurface. 

Turn Sequence Target: Spells and abilities can only target things 
within the Spellcaster’s or referencing card’s 
same region. 

Start Phase Adjacent: Refers to the card’s own square and 
Step 1: Untap all of your cards in the realm. the squares that it shares a border with. 
Step 2: All of your sites provide their mana. Nearby: Refers to the card’s own square and 
Step 3: Trigger abilities that happen at the all squares that surround it, including those 
start of the turn. diagonally. 
Step 4: End the Start Phase by drawing a card 
from either your spellbook or atlas. 

Main Phase
Your units can cast spells and activate their 
abilities. You may take these actions as many 
times as you have resources to do so, and in any 
order you like.  

End Phase Adjacent Nearby
Step 1: Trigger abilities that happen at the end 
of the turn. Adjacent & Nearby Locations: Only locations 

that are in the same region as the referencing 
Step 2: Players remove all damage from their card (or its spellcaster) are considered adjacent 
minions in the realm. or nearby locations. 
Step 3: Effects that last for your turn now end. Steps: A step is the minimum unit of distance 
Step 4: Your turn ends. between two adjacent locations.

Remember
•	 If the text of a card contradicts the rulebook, the card text takes precedence (pg 5).
•	 If you are the first player, you do not draw a card on your first turn (pg 16).
•	 Cards and abilities add events to the Storyline (pg 31). If multiple events compete to be added 
at the same moment, the non-active player’s events are added and resolved first, and then 
the active player’s.

- 37 -



Sorcery: Contested Realm
Quick Reference Guide

Common Keyword Abilities
Many units have keyword abilities printed in their game text which have rules associated with them. 
The most common of these keywords are listed below as well as in the glossary (page 32).

Airborne Movement +X
This unit may fly while on the surface, gaining the This unit may move up to X additional steps when 
following benefits: using the Move and Attack  or Defend abilities. To 
When taking a step this unit may move diagonally move multiple steps at once, choose a destination 
and can only be intercepted by other units if they and a path to it then traverse that path one step at 
have Airborne or Ranged. a time. You may need to resolve automatic triggers 
This unit cannot be targeted by attacks, unless the (or apply “always on” passive abilities), some of 
attacking unit has the Airborne ability. which may prematurely stop the motion of the 

unit.  
Burrowing
This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, and Ranged X
operate normally underground. When taking a This unit has “Tap → Shoot a projectile that stops 
step, it can move from the surface of a land site to after 1 (or X) steps. Strike the impacted unit”.
the underground level there, or vice versa. This unit may also intercept Airborne units.

Charge Spellcaster
This unit can tap, or be tapped, to pay for costs This card may cast spells. 
associated with any ability on the turn it is 
summoned. Stealth

Minions with Stealth cannot be targeted by spells 
Deathrite or abilities from your opponents (including 
When this unit dies, do what is stated before placing attacks), they can’t be intercepted, their attacks 
it in the cemetery. can’t be defended, and projectiles cannot hit them. 

Disable Stealth is tracked with a stealth token, and it’s lost 
after the minion interacts with the realm.

While disabled, a minion loses all abilities 
(including basic abilities like Move and Attack), Non-minions cannot have Stealth. If a minion with 
doesn’t strike when fighting, can’t cast spells, and Stealth becomes a non-minion, remove the Stealth 
can’t take any action granted by another card or token.
effect (ie. strike, shoot a projectile, take a step, etc.). Submerge
A disabled minion can still be forcibly moved or This unit can be safely summoned to, exist in, and 
tapped by effects operate normally underwater. When taking a step, 
Genesis it can move from the surface of a water site to the 

underwater level there, or vice versa. 
When this card enters the realm, do what is stated.

Voidwalk
Immobile This unit can be summoned to any void location 
This unit can’t take steps. and safely exist and operate there. When taking a 
Lethal step it can move into an adjacent void, or out of 
Any strictly positive amount of damage this card the void and onto the surface of an adjacent site 
deals to a minion is enough to kill. (or directly to the subsurface if they can operate 

there).  

- 38 -